Problem 1.What Database Models do You Know?


Database systems can be based on different data models or database models respectively. 
A data model is a collection of concepts and rules for the description of the structure of the database. 
Structure of the database means the data types, the constraints and the relationships for the description or storage of data respectively. 

The most often used data models are:


The network model and the hierarchical model are the predecessors of the relational model. 
They are build upon individual data sets and are able to express hierarchical or network like structures of the real world.

1. Hierarchical Model
The hierarchical database stores data in a series of records. These records have a set of field values attached to them. 
All instances of a specific record are collected together as a "record type". 
It uses "Parent Child Relationships" to create links between record types. 
It does this by using trees. However, it is only able to cope with one tree. 
As well, there can only be one parent per child, and no relationships among the child records are possible.
A hierarchical database has a very structured form, as it allows no links between layers in different branches of the tree. 
Therefore, it is easy to use for adding, updating and deleting records.

2. Network Model
The network database model is very similar to the hierarchical model. 
However, instead of using a single-parent tree hierarchy, the network model uses set theory to provide a tree-like hierarchy 
with the exception that the child tables were allowed to have more than one parent. This allowed the network database model to support many relationships.
A good example of the network model is the Local Area Network (LAN), which connects computers and devices in a limited geographic area.

3. Relational Model
The relational model is the best known and in today’s DBMS most often implemented database model. 
It defines a database as a collection of tables (relations) which contain all data. 
A relational database is a database system in which any database file can be a component of more than one of the database's tables.
It is also a database system in which the database is organized and accessed according to the relationships between data items 
without the need for any consideration of physical orientation and relationship. Relationships between data items are expressed by means of tables.
Properties of Relational Databases:
Values are atomic
Each column and row has a unique name
Each row is unique
The sequence of columns and rows is insignificant
Column values are of the same kind
Keys
A key is the tool to unlock access to tables. Knowledge of the key enables us to locate specific records, and cross the relationships between tables.
Certain fields may be designated as keys, which means that searches for specific values of that field will use indexing
A candidate key is any field, or combination of fields, that uniquely identifies a record. The field/s of the candidate key must contain unique values
(if the values were duplicated, they would be no longer identify unique records), and cannot contain a null value.
A primary key is the candidate key that has been chosen to identify unique records in a particular table.
A foreign key is a reference to a key in another table. A relationship between two tables is created by creating a common field to the two tables.
Foreign keys allow us to ensure what is called "referential integrity". This means a foreign key that contains a value must 
refer to an existing record in the related table.

4. Object-oriented Model
Object-oriented models define a database as a collection of objects with features and methods.
Multimedia, hypertext, and object relational are all databases connected with object-oriented databases.

4.1. Multimedia Database
Uses multiple forms of information content and information processing (e.g. text, audio, graphics, animation, video, interactivity). 
This means it can store more types of data than a relational database.
The object would store operations, which are called methods, the programs that objects use to process themselves.

4.2. Hypertext Database
Any object, whether it be a piece of text, a picture, or a film, can be linked to any other object. 
Hypertext databases are particularly useful for organizing large amounts of disparate information, but they are not designed for numerical analysis.

4.3. Hypermedia Database
Hypermedia Databases allow media files to be queried and used as a tool to develop an understanding of your originally searched question. 
The goal of a hypermedia data base is to minimize error while saving space; this goal is obtained by linking to files via 'tags' or searchable text, 
then upon entry into the link (after a search is completed) the files format program is ran.

5. Object-relational Model
Object-oriented models are very powerful but also quite complex. 
With the relatively new object-relational database model is the wide spread and simple relational database model 
extended by some basic object-oriented concepts. These allow us to work with the widely known relational database 
model but also have some advantages of the object-oriented model without its complexity.
An object-oriented database uses software where little chunks are written within the database files. An object has two parts:
*data that could be audio, video or graphics
*instructions on what action to be taken on the data.
Object-oriented database has the capability to handle from small files to very large files of information. 
It is easy to read and more efficient when it comes to managing a lot of data.

6. Multidimensional Database
the multidimensional data model is used when the objective is to analyze data rather than to perform online transactions. 
Multidimensional database technology is a key factor in the interactive analysis of large amounts of data for decision-making purposes.
In contrast to previous technologies, these databases view data as multidimensional cubes that are particularly well suited for data analysis.