Problem 9. Pros and Cons of Using Indexes in a Database?


A database index is a data structure that improves the speed of data retrieval operations on a database table at the cost of additional writes 
and storage space to maintain the index data structure. Indexes are used to quickly locate data without having to search every row in a database 
table every time a database table is accessed. Indexes can be created using one or more columns of a database table, providing the basis for both 
rapid random lookups and efficient access of ordered records.

An index is a copy of select columns of data from a table that can be searched very efficiently that also includes a low-level disk block address 
or direct link to the complete row of data it was copied from. 

1. Clustered index

Clustering alters the data block into a certain distinct order to match the index, resulting in the row data being stored in order. 
Therefore, only one clustered index can be created on a given database table. The primary feature of a clustered index is therefore 
the ordering of the physical data rows in accordance with the index blocks that point to them. 

2. B-Tree

B-tree is a tree data structure that keeps data sorted and allows searches, sequential access, insertions, and deletions in logarithmic time.
In B-trees, internal (non-leaf) nodes can have a variable number of child nodes within some pre-defined range. When data is inserted or removed from 
a node, its number of child nodes changes. In order to maintain the pre-defined range, internal nodes may be joined or split. 


3. Column-store index

The order that the index definition defines the columns in is important. It is possible to retrieve a set of row identifiers using only the first 
indexed column. However, it is not possible or efficient (on most databases) to retrieve the set of row identifiers using only the second or 
greater indexed column.


4. Full-text search index

Full text search refers to techniques for searching a single computer-stored document or a collection in a full text database. 
In a full-text search, a search engine examines all of the words in every stored document as it tries to match search criteria.


5. Spatial index

A sparse index in databases is a file with pairs of keys and pointers for every block in the data file. 
Every key in this file is associated with a particular pointer to the block in the sorted data file. 

Indexers Pros And Cons

If indexes are used, writing to table (for example inserting rows) is slower, because in addition to just writing the data, MySQL needs to
handle the index file also. This is an issue usually only if you need very fast inserts or you need to insert thousands of rows at the same
time and fast.

They might increase query speed or they might not. Basic rule is that if you are searching some specific key in a table, using indexes in that
field will make query faster, but if you have index in some other field, it won't make a difference.